1.) World Animal Protection is a global organisation. We work in over 50 countries, collaborating with local communities, NGOs, governments and other key stakeholders to protect animals and change their lives for the better.


Scope
This policy covers all staff and volunteers of World Animal Protection and will inform how they
deliver and communicate all campaign and project work within our four core programme areas.


Policy
World Animal Protection works according to four fundamental principles that provide an overarching statement of our beliefs, and philosophical guidance under which all other policy positions should be aligned to achieve our vision of “A world where animals live free from suffering”. They are:


We work to give animals a good life. This means making sure that animals enjoy good
health, that the balance of their experiences are positive and that they are able to express
their natural behaviours.


We put animal sentience at the heart of our work. We recognise that animals have the
ability to feel. We won’t accept the suffering of any sentient animal.


We base our work on robust evidence. Our credibility comes from our unique combination
of hands-on veterinary experience, scientific research and specialist investigation expertise.
We build and use this evidence to assess our impact so that we deliver meaningful,
sustainable change for animals.


We help people help animals. Animal protection is not a luxury. It is an essential part of the
solution to the world’s biggest issues. That’s why we will build a movement of partner
organisations, governments, communities and individuals and campaign wherever necessary
to move people to protect animals.


2.) AWI


Humans threaten wildlife through harassment, habitat degradation, encroachment and destruction, cruel and irresponsible hunting and trapping, capture and killing for proﬁt, incidental poisoning and vehicle strikes, and culling. AWI works to safeguard wild animals and their habitats, and minimize or eliminate the impacts of detrimental human actions. We urge governments and other policymakers to halt or prevent damaging actions by calling for better enforcement of wildlife protection laws, promoting severe penalties for wildlife criminals, and supporting increased funding for federal land and wildlife management agencies.
We advocate for humane solutions to human-wildlife conﬂicts, and engage and educate the public on ways to help wildlife.
AWI works to prevent commercial exploitation of threatened and endangered species by ﬁghting for enforcement against poachers, smugglers, and dishonest animal dealers. We are actively involved in monitoring and contesting unsustainable or inhumane trade in wildlife, including through our participation in meetings of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora to help ensure that international trade in wildlife does not threaten species with extinction. AWI encourages research into humane, non-lethal wildlife management, including through its Christine Stevens Wildlife Award, and discourages and opposes methods of managing wildlife that are cruel, unnecessary, and/or are not based on sound science. AWI campaigns to protect the rights of wild horses and burros and seeks to end the use of the non-selective and highly destructive steel-jaw leghold traps, which despite being banned in over 70 countries around the globe, including the entire European Union—is still the most common type of trap used to catch millions of fur bearing animals each year in the US.




3.) 
Our Mission
Defenders of Wildlife is dedicated to the protection of all native
animals and plants in their natural communities. Founded in 1947, Defenders of Wildlife is the premier U.S.-based national conservation organization dedicated to the protection and restoration of imperiled species and their habitats in North America. Defenders’ approach is direct and straightforward – We protect and restore imperiled species throughout North America by transforming policies and institutions and by promoting innovative solutions. We speak with one voice informed by scienti c, legal and policy expertise, hands-on wildlife management experience and effective advocacy. Our team has the experience and knowledge to engage in any arena to protect wildlife —Congress, the courts, federal and state agencies, academia and public debate—and does so tirelessly and effectively. Our field of officers give us a grounding in the ecosystems and communities where we work, allowing us to engage the public, build support for conservation and develop practical solutions that will stand the test of time. Fueled by the commitment of our members, partners and supporters, we are building a powerful,
enduring voice for wildlife conservation.


Our Conservation Vision


Defenders of Wildlife envisions a future where diverse wildlife populations in North America are secure and thriving, sustained by a network of healthy lands and waters.Diverse wildlife populations. Our conservation efforts are targeted at the full range of vulnerable North American biodiversity, from plants to pollinators to predators. While we do not set geographic boundaries on our work, we primarily focus on species of North America, including migratory and transboundary species that move freely across the borders or through the waters of the United States, Mexico and Canada. We recognize that we cannot protect any species without simultaneously protecting the habitats and other species on which it relies. Secure and thriving. We are working for the day when vulnerable North American species rebound to the point that they are secure—no longer threatened with rapid decline or extinction—and thriving in robust, well-distributed populations. Network of healthy lands and waters. Wildlife has the greatest chance of being secure and thriving if it is supported by a transnational network of public and
private lands, rivers and coastal waters, core natural areas and working landscapes.


Our Strategic Plan
To help attain our vision, Defenders’ strategic plan provides a framework for setting objectives and allocating resources across the organization. This strategic approach prioritizes long-term solutions with measurable results to help ensure that Defenders is an effective voice for wildlife conservation. Clearly de ning our vision and focusing our resources will help us to better ensure that North America’s spectacular wild animals and habitats will be here for the next generation.


4.) 


What We Do - Save the Elephants


We conduct vital research on elephant behaviour and ecology and pioneered GPS radio tracking in Africa to provide fresh insight into the life of elephants. After over 20 years of intensive monitoring the elephants of Samburu are one of the world’s best-studied populations. We also assist in implementing a UN-level programme to monitor the illegal killing of elephants. Our solid scientiﬁc data has helped shift international policy towards a better future for
the species.


Elephant Protection
We work with wildlife departments, protected area managers, and communities to assist their efforts to defend elephants against ivory poachers and trafﬁckers. We develop and deploy cutting edge tracking systems to monitor and protect elephants. Through our Elephant Crisis Fund we have supported more than 83 partners in the implementation of over 300 different projects in 40 different countries (July 2020) aimed at stopping the killing, stopping the trafﬁcking, and ending the demand for ivory.




Spreading Awareness Globally
Elephants are intelligent creatures with complex levels of consciousness with a profound role in human cultures as well as African ecosystems. We share our awareness of their importance both locally and internationally through ﬁlms, publications, a computerised elephant library, a news service, social networks and our website. We involve local people in research and education to develop a conservation ethic based on local knowledge and elephant needs, and recognize that the best ambassadors for elephants are the people with whom they share their land.


5.) UNDP


OUR FOCUS




Wildlife and habitats
The illegal wildlife trade in live species or their parts – including everything from rhino horn and elephant ivory, to pangolin scales, live parrots, lion bones, shark fins, medicinal plants and timber - is an urgent global conservation challenge that has escalated dramatically in recent decades. Wildlife trafficking is a multifaceted, global threat that erodes biodiversity and ecosystem integrity, leading to massive organized poaching criminalizing local communities for small returns. This, in turn, strips countries of their national assets, deprives local communities of income-earning possibilities from tourism and sustainable use, and often fuels corruption and conflict. To meet the challenges posed by wildlife trafficking and poaching, stronger policy frameworks, institutions and law enforcement are needed. Equally important is taking action to simultaneously reduce poverty through expanded livelihood opportunities and the involvement of indigenous and local communities in decision-making, as well as general awareness-raising.


UNDP supports an integrated approach to address wildlife trafficking. We support countries to diversify rural livelihoods, manage human-wildlife conflict, strengthen protected area management, share the benefits from sustainable wildlife management with local communities,
and strengthen site-based and national enforcement responses. We currently support 19 countries under the GEF-financed Global Wildlife Program, a global partnership that aims to reduce poaching, trafficking, and demand for illegal wildlife products. UNDP facilitates south-south and triangular co-operation between source, transit, and consumer countries, and hosts the Secretariat for the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Illicit Trade in Wildlife and Forest Products and the Jaguar 2030 Coordination Committee working with jaguar range countries and supporting organizations including Panthera, WCS, and WWF. UNDP also hosts the Secretariat for the Lion’s Share Fund, harnessing the power of advertising and businesses to conserve wildlife and habitats worldwide. Partnerships in this field include national and local
governments, CITES, sister UN agencies such as UNEP and UNODC, the World Bank, the Global Environment Facility, the United for Wildlife coalition, and other civil society and the United for Wildlife coalition, and other civil society and private sector partners.


6.) Wildlife Conservation Society


INTERNATIONAL POLICY
International environmental conventions and treaties bring together governments, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and other stakeholders to find shared solutions to global environmental challenges. There are several such conventions and treaties that specifically address wildlife (both terrestrial and marine). They serve as legal frameworks that
help to protect wildlife, such as controls on the international trade in wildlife and wildlife products through the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora (CITES), stimulating transboundary conservation through the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), or by enhancing the protection of outstanding natural areas/national parks, for example, through the World Heritage Convention.


Our Goal
To contribute WCS's scientific, technical, and policy expertise to international discussions between governments and influence international policies and commitments that will benefit wildlife and wild places, and impact WCS's work in the field for the benefit of wildlife and wild places.




Our Work
WCS engages with governments, international policy-makers and decision-makers, intergovernmental organizations, and other stakeholders to share our scientific, technical, and policy expertise, and to advocate for the development and implementation of international policies and commitments that positively impact conservation on the ground (and in the water). Our focus is on issues and treaties or agreements that directly impact the wildlife and wild places that WCS works to conserve, with particular emphasis on transboundary issues that require international cooperation, such as: Reducing the threat of wildlife trade (legal and illegal) to a wide variety species, including elephants, tigers, pangolins, macaws and parrots, freshwater turtles and tortoises, sharks and rays, and many others; Enhancing cooperation among countries to conserve migratory species along key migration routes. 


7.) 


WILDLIFE RESCUE
& CARE


Wildlife Alliance’s wildlife programs are designed to rehabilitate animals victimized by the wildlife trade and provide them with the support and care necessary to ready them for release backinto the wild.


OUR MISSION


Wildlife Alliance’s wildlife programs are designed to rehabilitate animals victimized by the wildlife trade and provide them with the support and care necessary to ready them for release back into the wild.


WILDLIFE REHABILITATION
Phnom Tamao Wildlife Rescue Center is a government-owned facility set over 6,000 acres of regenerating forest. Wildlife Alliance animal husbandry specialists and veterinarians care for over 1,400 animals across more than 100 species, including Asian elephants, tigers, Pileated
gibbons, otters, and many hoofstock, birds and reptiles. All of the animals have been rescued from the illegal wildlife trade or are victims of habitat loss and without a berth at the rescue
center, they would likely be dead.




Since arriving at Phnom Tamao in 2001, Wildlife Alliance has provided much needed
funding and animal care expertise to transform the center. Investment in infrastructure and personnel ensures that all animals are treated responsibly and no animal is ever
turned away. The partnership between Wildlife Alliance and the Cambodian
Forestry Administration ensures animals rescued from wildlife traders in Cambodia are guaranteed a lifetime of care and those who have made a full recovery have the chance of release back into the wild. With nearly 300,000 visitors annually, Phnom Tamao Wildlife Rescue Center is a show piece for wildlife conservation efforts in
Cambodia.


RELEASE IS ALWAYS OUR PRIMARY GOAL


Release is always our primary goal. Once animals have fully recovered and those born at Phnom Tamao Wildlife Rescue Center are released back into the wild under IUCN protocols at one of our three primary release sites; the Phnom Tamao Protected Forest, our Wildlife Rehabilitation Station set deep in the southern Cardamom Mountains in southwest Cambodia,
or our Rewilding Project in the Angkor Temples Forest Complex in Siem Reap. Wildlife Alliance has successfully released thousands of animals, including pangolins, binturongs, civets, slow loris’, macaques, leopard cats, porcupines, parakeets and hill mynahs. Released animals are
monitored using various methods, including radio, telemetry, camera traps, track identiﬁcation
and visual observation to ensure release strategies are successful and the animals are able to survive. Wildlife Alliance has forest rangers on the ground patrolling the area day and night, ensuring released wildlife a safe habitat, free from the dangers of being poached.




ANGKOR RELEASE PROJECT


The Angkor temple complex and the surrounding forest are one of the most culturally and archaeologically signiﬁcant locations in Southeast Asia. This historic UNESCO World Heritage site was once a vibrant forest, home to various primates, big cats, deer, birds and other species until excessive and unrestricted hunting in the late 20th century decimated wildlife populations. Wildlife Alliance is releasing rescued wildlife into this historic forest and  bringing life back to
this sacred site.


On December 12, 2013, a pair of endangered pileated gibbons took their ﬁrst steps towards a new beginning in the wild in the forest surrounding the Angkor Temple Complex in Siem Reap,
Cambodia. This release marked the beginning of a new endeavor between Wildlife Alliance, the
Forestry Administration and the Apsara Authority who manages the World Heritage site, to repopulate the forest surrounding the highproﬁle tourism destination. Stretching over 40,000 hectares, the park receives around 2 million visitors a year, making this reintroduction program an excellent opportunity to educate visitors on the importance of conservation, while showcasing Cambodia’s dedication to wildlife protection. This ambitious project signals a renewed impetus to protect Cambodia’s natural heritage. With better management and enforcement of the law, the Angkor forest has now become a safe haven for wildlife.
Animals, such as pileated gibbons that are at risk of being poached or disappearing due to severe habitat destruction, can now wander freely without risk of harm. The released gibbons continue to thrive in their new home and have since had two offspring. A second pair of pileated gibbons were released in June 2015 and have also had an offspring. The successful wild births signify the triumph of this release program as we hope the population will continue to grow naturally. A trio of Endangered silvered langurs were released in December 2014 and continue to do well. With permission from the Cambodia government, we would like to release several other species including sambar and muntjac deer, slow lorises, leopard cats, peafowl, binturongs and civets. Each animal would require speciﬁc rehabilitation protocols and enclosures appropriate to the different species in order to acclimate to their new surroundings before release. To ensure the animals are healthy and safe, post-release monitoring equipment is also necessary to survey the animals after their release.


Help make the exciting expansion of this program a reality. $9,340 will build one release enclosure, and supply 12 camera traps and 6 radio collars. Your gift will not only bring wildlife back to Angkor, but more importantly, give these animals a second chance at life in the wild.




8.) World Bank


Overview
A Global Partnership on Wildlife Conservation and Crime Prevention for Sustainable Development


The illegal wildlife trade (IWT) is a global threat. The problem is particularly acute in Africa and Asia, where iconic species – the African elephant, white and black rhinos, and pangolins – are being poached to extinction. About 33,000 elephants are poached every year for their ivory. Rhino poaching has also reached crisis levels. In 2017, 1,028 rhinos were poached in South Africa, up steeply from 13 in 2007, according to TRAFFIC. As species are poached and illegally harvested at increasingly unsustainable levels, wildlife crime has become the fourth most lucrative illegal business after narcotics, human trafficking, and weapons. The presence of wildlife in protected areas ensures that an ecosystem can function and maintain natural capital (soil, forests, air, water, etc.) As natural resource crime such as poaching increases, it results in environmental degradation. This adversely affects ecosystem services, which in turn affects the survival of these communities who depend upon these services for livelihoods, fuel and food. The estimated economic losses due to illegal logging, fishing, and wildlife trade are $1 trillion–$2 trillion per year — with more than 90 percent of these losses from ecosystem services that are not currently priced by the market. (World Bank 2019)


To respond to the growing crisis and international call for action, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) in June 2015 launched the “Global Partnership on Wildlife Conservation and Crime Prevention for Sustainable Development” program also known as the Global Wildlife Program (GWP). 
 


What does the Global Wildlife Program aim to do?


The GWP is a World Bank-led, GEF-funded global partnership that promotes wildlife conservation and sustainable development by combatting illicit trafficking in wildlife. Phase II of the Global Wildlife Program (GWP) was approved by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Council in June 2019. The $82 million grant (Phase II) builds on a $131 million grant from Phase I, 2015, allowing the GWP to curb illegal wildlife trade and promote wildlife-based economies in 37 projects across 32 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. By approaching the poaching crisis holistically through various country projects and a broader global project, it seeks to reduce both the supply and demand that drives the illegal wildlife trade and protect species and habitats through integrated landscape planning.




GWP’s priority and immediate focus are combating wildlife poaching, trafficking, and demand. 


Through its global and country projects, the GWP will:
Promote community-based natural resource management and tourism development
Promote landscape-level management and human-wildlife conflict mitigation tools
Increase law enforcement efforts in-country through improved legislation, judiciary and prosecution
Raise awareness of demand reduction through targeted campaigns that encourage behavior change.
Help countries achieve their biodiversity goals: It will support the implementation of country priorities identified in the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, Elephant Action Plan and other wildlife and tourism national strategies.
Accelerate learning: It will develop an online repository of information and conduct training and capacity building workshops to ensure knowledge exchange between countries, partners and other stakeholders. It will provide opportunities for regional and global knowledge exchanges.
Enhance collaboration: It will foster intergovernmental cooperation, utilize geospatial and surveillance tools, increase intelligence sharing to track criminals, collaborate on efforts around anti-money laundering, capture lessons learned, and apply innovative communication strategies. In addition, it will include a component to promote best practices in ports and collaboration between African and Asian countries and agencies involved in reducing maritime transport of illegal wildlife products, especially ivory.
Strengthen partnerships: It will build synergies with the International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime (ICCWC). It is a collaboration between the CITES Secretariat, INTERPOL, UNODC, the World Customs Organization and the World Bank Group, which has been a partner to ICCWC since 2010.
Implement a monitoring and evaluation framework:  It will develop and deploy a monitoring system for the program to track program progress and serve as an integral tool to promote synergies amongst national projects.
Promote donor coordination: As part of the ongoing engagement with key international donors, the program will serve as a platform to assess the current state of international funding to tackle illicit trafficking in wildlife. The GWP released the first-ever review of international donor funding for combating illegal wildlife trade in Africa and Asia, which shows that over US$1.3 billion was committed by 24 international donors since 2010. The report serves as a baseline the donor community can build upon, which in consultation with recipient countries, can establish the future state vision for IWT financing. This will facilitate sharing of lessons learned and inform strategic efforts to fill financing gaps for priority intervention areas.


9.) WWF


Wildlife Conservation | Initiatives | WWF


World Wildlife Fund - WWF - Worldwildilife.org


Act now to protect vulnerable wildlife and nature around the world.


Wildlife Conservation
Ensure the world’s most iconic species, including tigers, rhinos, and elephants, are secured and recovering in the wild. 


Saving nature is at the very heart of what we do as WWF. For nearly 60 years, we have made it our mission to find solutions that save the marvelous array of life on our planet by applying the best science available and working closely with local communities.


But our work is far from done. Humans are behind the current rate of species extinction, which is at least 100–1,000 times higher than nature intended. We’ve seen an astonishing 60% decline in the size of populations of mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, and amphibians in just over 40 years, according to WWF's Living Planet Report 2018. And the impacts will reach far beyond the potential cultural loss of iconic species like tigers, rhinos and whales. The good news is we’ve also seen what’s working. WWF has been part of successful wildlife recovery stories ranging from southern Africa’s black rhino to black bucks in the Himalayas. And this, in turn, is helping to protect rich and varied ecosystems while ensuring people continue to benefit from nature. This much is clear: we cannot afford to fail in our mission to save a living planet.


An Eye on Recovery
WWF is helping to support Australia’s first large-scale collaborative camera trap project.




Why It Matters
What WWF Is Doing




Conserving wildlife is at heart of our mission. We focus on protecting populations of some of the world’s most ecologically, economically, and culturally important species—the survival of which are threatened by poaching, illegal trade and habitat loss. We use the best science available to link on-the-ground work with high-level policy action to create lasting solutions that benefit wild animals as well as the people that live alongside them.


Stop Wildlife Crime
WWF uses our expertise in policy, wildlife trade, advocacy, and communications in an effort to stop wildlife crime in the US and around the world. At home, we ensure the US enacts tight ivory commerce restrictions. Partnerships with technology companies help us develop innovative ways to combat wildlife crime using everything from drones to infrared cameras that can detect poachers in the dead of night. To combat the trade in illegal wildlife products through web-based platforms, WWF has teamed up with e-commerce and social media companies to adopt a standardized wildlife policy framework for online trade.


Double the Number of Tigers
WWF aims to double the world’s wild tiger population by 2022 (TX2). We’re working with world leaders to take action, focusing conservation efforts in key sites, raising funds to permanently protect landscapes, and supporting community-based conservation. Saving tigers is about more than restoring a single species. As a large predator, tigers play an important role in maintaining a healthy ecosystem. Every time we protect a tiger, we protect around 25,000 acres of forest—forests that sustain wildlife and local communities and supply people around the world with clean air, water, food, and products.
Wildlife Conservation
Empower People to Protect Wildlife
Over the last few decades, conservationists have come to understand just how central community involvement is to wildlife conservation success—and how important it is for communities to actively steward the natural resources around them to improve economic and social well-being. WWF’s community-based conservation work today reflects this fundamental reality. We work across a variety of communities and customize our work based on the specific needs and interests of a given place, taking into consideration each region’s particular set of conservation assets and challenges.


Closing Asia's Ivory Markets Illegal killing of elephants for ivory decimates global populations. Estimates indicate that each year poachers slaughter close to 20,000 elephants, mostly for their tusks. Fueling this rampant poaching is a steady consumer demand for ivory. Overall, we see demand increasing in East Asian and Southeast Asian markets, with the greatest demand in China, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Thailand. WWF is working to shut down the illegal markets in Thailand, and helped end the legal ivory trade in China. By tackling these markets now as part of a pan-Asian approach, WWF aims to leverage China’s recent actions to ban the ivory trade to prevent further displacement of the current China ivory trade to nearby countries.


Projects
WILDLABS.NET: Connectivity and collaboration to save the planet Conserving Wildlife and Enabling Communities in Namibia. Namibia is home to an array of wildlife, from ostriches and zebras roaming the gravel plains to penguins and seals chilling in the Atlantic currents. It was the first African country to incorporate protection of the environment into its constitution. With WWF’s help, the government has reinforced this conservation philosophy by empowering its communities with rights to manage and benefit from the country’s wildlife through communal conservancies.


10.) World Animal Initiative


Our mission is to understand and improve the lives of wild animals. Although the natural world is a source of great beauty and happiness, vast numbers of animals routinely face serious challenges such as disease, hunger, or natural disasters. There is no “one-size-fits-all” solution to these threats. However, even as we recognize that improving the welfare of free-ranging wild animals is difficult, we believe that humans have a responsibility to help whenever we can.


Our staff explores how humans can beneficially coexist with animals through the lens of wild animal welfare.  We respect wild animals as individuals with their own needs and preferences, rather than seeing them as mere parts of ecosystems. But this approach demands a richer understanding of wild animals’ lives. 


We want to take a proactive approach to managing the welfare benefits, threats, and uncertainties that are inherent to complex natural and urban environments. Yet, to take action safely, we must conduct research to understand the impacts of our actions. The transdisciplinary perspective of wild animal welfare draws upon ethics, ecology, and animal welfare science to gather the knowledge we need, facilitating evidence-based improvements to wild animals’ quality of life.


Without sufficient public interest or research activity, solutions to the problems wild animals face will go undiscovered.  Wild Animal Initiative currently focuses on helping scientists, grantors, and decision-makers investigate important and understudied questions about wild animal welfare. Our work catalyzes research and applied projects that will open the door to a clearer picture of wild animals’ needs and how to enhance their well-being. Ultimately, we envision a world in which people actively choose to help wild animals — and have the knowledge they need to do so responsibly.


11.) CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora)


Text of the Convention Contents
Definitions .................................................................................................................. 1 Fundamental principles ............................................................................................. 2 Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix I....................... 2 Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix II...................... 3 Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix III..................... 4 Permits and certificates............................................................................................. 4 Exemptions and other special provisions relating to trade ...................................... 5 Measures to be taken by the Parties ........................................................................ 6 Management and Scientific Authorities .................................................................... 7 Trade with States not party to the Convention ......................................................... 7 Conference of the Parties ......................................................................................... 7 The Secretariat .......................................................................................................... 8 International measures ............................................................................................. 9 Effect on domestic legislation and international conventions .................................. 9 Amendments to Appendices I and II....................................................................... 10 Appendix III and amendments thereto ................................................................... 11 Amendment of the Convention ............................................................................... 12 Resolution of disputes............................................................................................. 12 Signature ................................................................................................................. 12 Ratification, acceptance, approval.......................................................................... 13 Accession ................................................................................................................ 13 Entry into force ........................................................................................................ 13 Reservations ........................................................................................................... 14 Denunciation ........................................................................................................... 14 Depositary ............................................................................................................... 14
Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora Signed at Washington, D.C., on 3 March 1973
Amended at Bonn, on 22 June 1979 Amended at Gaborone, on 30 April 1983
The Contracting States,
Recognizing that wild fauna and flora in their many beautiful and varied forms are an irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the earth which must be protected for this and the generations to come;
Conscious of the ever-growing value of wild fauna and flora from aesthetic, scientific, cultural, recreational and economic points of view;
Recognizing that peoples and States are and should be the best protectors of their own wild fauna and flora;
Recognizing, in addition, that international co-operation is essential for the protection of certain species of wild fauna and flora against over-exploitation through international trade;
Convinced of the urgency of taking appropriate measures to this end; Have agreed as follows:
Article I Definitions
For the purpose of the present Convention, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) “Species” means any species, subspecies, or geographically separate population thereof;
(b) “Specimen” means:
(i) any animal or plant, whether alive or dead;
(ii) in the case of an animal: for species included in AppendicesI and II, any readily recognizable part or derivative thereof; and for species included in Appendix III, any readily recognizable part or derivative thereof specified in Appendix III in relation to the species; and
(iii) in the case of a plant: for species included in Appendix I, any readily recognizable part or derivative thereof; and for species included in Appendices II and III, any readily recognizable part or derivative thereof specified in Appendices II and III in relation to the species;
(c) “Trade” means export, re-export, import and introduction from the sea;
(d) “Re-export” means export of any specimen that has previously been imported;
(e) “Introduction from the sea” means transportation into a State of specimens of any species which were taken in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any State;
(f) “Scientific Authority” means a national scientific authority designated in accordance with Article IX;
(g) “Management Authority” means a national management authority designated in accordance with Article IX;
(h) “Party” means a State for which the present Convention has entered into force.
 Text of the Convention – 1


Article II Fundamental principles
1. Appendix I shall include all species threatened with extinction which are or may be affected by trade. Trade in specimens of these species must be subject to particularly strict regulation in order not to endanger further their survival and must only be authorized in exceptional circumstances.
2. Appendix II shall include:
(a) all species which although not necessarily now threatened with extinction may become so unless trade in specimens of such species is subject to strict regulation in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival; and
(b) other species which must be subject to regulation in order that trade in specimens of certain species referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph may be brought under effective control.
3. Appendix III shall include all species which any Party identifies as being subject to regulation within its jurisdiction for the purpose of preventing or restricting exploitation, and as needing the co-operation of other Parties in the control of trade.
4. The Parties shall not allow trade in specimens of species included in Appendices I, II and III except in accordance with the provisions of the present Convention.
Article III Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix I
1. All trade in specimens of species included in Appendix I shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
2. The export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit. An export permit shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Scientific Authority of the State of export has advised that such export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species;
(b) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that the specimen was not obtained in contravention of the laws of that State for the protection of fauna and flora;
(c) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that any living specimen will be so prepared and shipped as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment; and
(d) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that an import permit has been granted for the specimen.
3. The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I shall require the prior grant and presentation of an import permit and either an export permit or a re-export certificate. An import permit shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Scientific Authority of the State of import has advised that the import will be for purposes which are not detrimental to the survival of the species involved;
(b) a Scientific Authority of the State of import is satisfied that the proposed recipient of a living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it; and
(c) a Management Authority of the State of import is satisfied that the specimen is not to be used for primarily commercial purposes.
 Text of the Convention – 2


4. The re-export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I shall require the prior grant and presentation of a re-export certificate. A re-export certificate shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Management Authority of the State of re-export is satisfied that the specimen was imported into that State in accordance with the provisions of the present Convention;
(b) a Management Authority of the State of re-export is satisfied that any living specimen will be so prepared and shipped as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment; and
(c) a Management Authority of the State of re-export is satisfied that an import permit has been granted for any living specimen.
5. The introduction from the sea of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I shall require the prior grant of a certificate from a Management Authority of the State of introduction. A certificate shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Scientific Authority of the State of introduction advises that the introduction will not be detrimental to the survival of the species involved;
(b) a Management Authority of the State of introduction is satisfied that the proposed recipient of a living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it; and
(c) a Management Authority of the State of introduction is satisfied that the specimen is not to be used for primarily commercial purposes.
Article IV Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix II
1. All trade in specimens of species included in Appendix II shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
2. The export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit. An export permit shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Scientific Authority of the State of export has advised that such export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species;
(b) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that the specimen was not obtained in contravention of the laws of that State for the protection of fauna and flora; and
(c) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that any living specimen will be so prepared and shipped as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
3. A Scientific Authority in each Party shall monitor both the export permits granted by that State for specimens of species included in Appendix II and the actual exports of such specimens. Whenever a Scientific Authority determines that the export of specimens of any such species should be limited in order to maintain that species throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in the ecosystems in which it occurs and well above the level at which that species might become eligible for inclusion in Appendix I, the Scientific Authority shall advise the appropriate Management Authority of suitable measures to be taken to limit the grant of export permits for specimens of that species.
4. The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II shall require the prior presentation of either an export permit or a re-export certificate.
 Text of the Convention – 3


5. The re-export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II shall require the prior grant and presentation of a re-export certificate. A re-export certificate shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Management Authority of the State of re-export is satisfied that the specimen was imported into that State in accordance with the provisions of the present Convention; and
(b) a Management Authority of the State of re-export is satisfied that any living specimen will be so prepared and shipped as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
6. The introduction from the sea of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II shall require the prior grant of a certificate from a Management Authority of the State of introduction. A certificate shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Scientific Authority of the State of introduction advises that the introduction will not be detrimental to the survival of the species involved; and
(b) a Management Authority of the State of introduction is satisfied that any living specimen will be so handled as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
7. Certificates referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article may be granted on the advice of a Scientific Authority, in consultation with other national scientific authorities or, when appropriate, international scientific authorities, in respect of periods not exceeding one year for total numbers of specimens to be introduced in such periods.
Article V Regulation of trade in specimens of species included in Appendix III
1. All trade in specimens of species included in Appendix III shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
2. The export of any specimen of a species included in Appendix III from any State which has included that species in Appendix III shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit. An export permit shall only be granted when the following conditions have been met:
(a) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that the specimen was not obtained in contravention of the laws of that State for the protection of fauna and flora; and
(b) a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that any living specimen will be so prepared and shipped as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
3. The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix III shall require, except in circumstances to which paragraph 4 of this Article applies, the prior presentation of a certificate of origin and, where the import is from a State which has included that species in Appendix III, an export permit.
4. In the case of re-export, a certificate granted by the Management Authority of the State of re- export that the specimen was processed in that State or is being re-exported shall be accepted by the State of import as evidence that the provisions of the present Convention have been complied with in respect of the specimen concerned.
Article VI Permits and certificates
1. Permits and certificates granted under the provisions of Articles III, IV, and V shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
  Text of the Convention – 4


2. An export permit shall contain the information specified in the model set forth in Appendix IV, and may only be used for export within a period of six months from the date on which it was granted.
3. Each permit or certificate shall contain the title of the present Convention, the name and any identifying stamp of the Management Authority granting it and a control number assigned by the Management Authority.
4. Any copies of a permit or certificate issued by a Management Authority shall be clearly marked as copies only and no such copy may be used in place of the original, except to the extent endorsed thereon.
5. A separate permit or certificate shall be required for each consignment of specimens.
6. A Management Authority of the State of import of any specimen shall cancel and retain the export permit or re-export certificate and any corresponding import permit presented in respect of the import of that specimen.
7. Where appropriate and feasible a Management Authority may affix a mark upon any specimen to assist in identifying the specimen. For these purposes “mark” means any indelible imprint, lead seal or other suitable means of identifying a specimen, designed in such a way as to render its imitation by unauthorized persons as difficult as possible.
Article VII Exemptions and other special provisions relating to trade
1. The provisions of Articles III, IV and V shall not apply to the transit or transhipment of specimens through or in the territory of a Party while the specimens remain in Customs control.
2. Where a Management Authority of the State of export or re-export is satisfied that a specimen was acquired before the provisions of the present Convention applied to that specimen, the provisions of Articles III, IV and V shall not apply to that specimen where the Management Authority issues a certificate to that effect.
3. The provisions of Articles III, IV and V shall not apply to specimens that are personal or household effects. This exemption shall not apply where:
(a) in the case of specimens of a species included in Appendix I, they were acquired by the owner outside his State of usual residence, and are being imported into that State; or
(b) in the case of specimens of species included in Appendix II:
(i) they were acquired by the owner outside his State of usual residence and in a State where removal from the wild occurred;
(ii) they are being imported into the owner's State of usual residence; and
(iii) the State where removal from the wild occurred requires the prior grant of export permits before any export of such specimens;
unless a Management Authority is satisfied that the specimens were acquired before the provisions of the present Convention applied to such specimens.
4. Specimens of an animal species included in Appendix I bred in captivity for commercial purposes, or of a plant species included in Appendix I artificially propagated for commercial purposes, shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Appendix II.
5. Where a Management Authority of the State of export is satisfied that any specimen of an animal species was bred in captivity or any specimen of a plant species was artificially propagated, or is a part of such an animal or plant or was derived therefrom, a certificate by that Management Authority to that effect shall be accepted in lieu of any of the permits or certificates required under the provisions of Article III, IV or V.
 Text of the Convention – 5


6. The provisions of Articles III, IV and V shall not apply to the non-commercial loan, donation or exchange between scientists or scientific institutions registered by a Management Authority of their State, of herbarium specimens, other preserved, dried or embedded museum specimens, and live plant material which carry a label issued or approved by a Management Authority.
7. A Management Authority of any State may waive the requirements of Articles III, IV and V and allow the movement without permits or certificates of specimens which form part of a travelling zoo, circus, menagerie, plant exhibition or other travelling exhibition provided that:
(a) the exporter or importer registers full details of such specimens with that Management Authority;
(b) the specimens are in either of the categories specified in paragraph 2 or 5 of this Article; and
(c) the Management Authority is satisfied that any living specimen will be so transported and cared for as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
Article VIII Measures to be taken by the Parties
1. The Parties shall take appropriate measures to enforce the provisions of the present Convention and to prohibit trade in specimens in violation thereof. These shall include measures:
(a) to penalize trade in, or possession of, such specimens, or both; and
(b) to provide for the confiscation or return to the State of export of such specimens.
2. In addition to the measures taken under paragraph 1 of this Article, a Party may, when it deems it necessary, provide for any method of internal reimbursement for expenses incurred as a result of the confiscation of a specimen traded in violation of the measures taken in the application of the provisions of the present Convention.
3. As far as possible, the Parties shall ensure that specimens shall pass through any formalities required for trade with a minimum of delay. To facilitate such passage, a Party may designate ports of exit and ports of entry at which specimens must be presented for clearance. The Parties shall ensure further that all living specimens, during any period of transit, holding or shipment, are properly cared for so as to minimize the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment.
4. Where a living specimen is confiscated as a result of measures referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article:
(a) the specimen shall be entrusted to a Management Authority of the State of confiscation;
(b) the Management Authority shall, after consultation with the State of export, return the specimen to that State at the expense of that State, or to a rescue centre or such other place as the Management Authority deems appropriate and consistent with the purposes of the present Convention; and
(c) the Management Authority may obtain the advice of a Scientific Authority, or may, whenever it considers it desirable, consult the Secretariat in order to facilitate the decision under sub- paragraph (b) of this paragraph, including the choice of a rescue centre or other place.
5. A rescue centre as referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article means an institution designated by a Management Authority to look after the welfare of living specimens, particularly those that have been confiscated.
6. Each Party shall maintain records of trade in specimens of species included in Appendices I, II and III which shall cover:
(a) the names and addresses of exporters and importers; and
(b) the number and type of permits and certificates granted; the States with which such trade occurred; the numbers or quantities and types of specimens, names of species as included
 Text of the Convention – 6


in Appendices I, II and III and, where applicable, the size and sex of the specimens in question.
7. Each Party shall prepare periodic reports on its implementation of the present Convention and shall transmit to the Secretariat:
(a) an annual report containing a summary of the information specified in sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 6 of this Article; and
(b) a biennial report on legislative, regulatory and administrative measures taken to enforce the provisions of the present Convention.
8. The information referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article shall be available to the public where this is not inconsistent with the law of the Party concerned.
Article IX Management and Scientific Authorities
1. Each Party shall designate for the purposes of the present Convention:
(a) one or more Management Authorities competent to grant permits or certificates on behalf of that Party; and
(b) one or more Scientific Authorities.
2. A State depositing an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall at that time inform the Depositary Government of the name and address of the Management Authority authorized to communicate with other Parties and with the Secretariat.
3. Any changes in the designations or authorizations under the provisions of this Article shall be communicated by the Party concerned to the Secretariat for transmission to all other Parties.
4. Any Management Authority referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall, if so requested by the Secretariat or the Management Authority of another Party, communicate to it impression of stamps, seals or other devices used to authenticate permits or certificates.
Article X Trade with States not party to the Convention
Where export or re-export is to, or import is from, a State not a Party to the present Convention, comparable documentation issued by the competent authorities in that State which substantially conforms with the requirements of the present Convention for permits and certificates may be accepted in lieu thereof by any Party.
Article XI Conference of the Parties
1. The Secretariat shall call a meeting of the Conference of the Parties not later than two years after the entry into force of the present Convention.
2. Thereafter the Secretariat shall convene regular meetings at least once every two years, unless the Conference decides otherwise, and extraordinary meetings at any time on the written request of at least one-third of the Parties.
   Text of the Convention – 7


3. At meetings, whether regular or extraordinary, the Parties shall review the implementation of the present Convention and may:
(a) make such provision as may be necessary to enable the Secretariat to carry out its duties, and adopt financial provisions;
(b) consider and adopt amendments to Appendices I and II in accordance with Article XV;
(c) review the progress made towards the restoration and conservation of the species included in Appendices I, II and III;
(d) receive and consider any reports presented by the Secretariat or by any Party; and
(e) where appropriate, make recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the present Convention.
4. At each regular meeting, the Parties may determine the time and venue of the next regular meeting to be held in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article.
5. At any meeting, the Parties may determine and adopt rules of procedure for the meeting.
6. The United Nations, its Specialized Agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as any State not a Party to the present Convention, may be represented at meetings of the Conference by observers, who shall have the right to participate but not to vote.
7. Any body or agency technically qualified in protection, conservation or management of wild fauna and flora, in the following categories, which has informed the Secretariat of its desire to be represented at meetings of the Conference by observers, shall be admitted unless at least one- third of the Parties present object:
(a) international agencies or bodies, either governmental or non-governmental, and national governmental agencies and bodies; and
(b) national non-governmental agencies or bodies which have been approved for this purpose by the State in which they are located.
Once admitted, these observers shall have the right to participate but not to vote.
Article XII The Secretariat
1. Upon entry into force of the present Convention, a Secretariat shall be provided by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme. To the extent and in the manner he considers appropriate, he may be assisted by suitable inter-governmental or non-governmental international or national agencies and bodies technically qualified in protection, conservation and management of wild fauna and flora.
2. The functions of the Secretariat shall be:
(a) to arrange for and service meetings of the Parties;
(b) to perform the functions entrusted to it under the provisions of Articles XV and XVI of the present Convention;
(c) to undertake scientific and technical studies in accordance with programmes authorized by the Conference of the Parties as will contribute to the implementation of the present Convention, including studies concerning standards for appropriate preparation and shipment of living specimens and the means of identifying specimens;
(d) to study the reports of Parties and to request from Parties such further information with respect thereto as it deems necessary to ensure implementation of the present Convention;
 Text of the Convention – 8


(e) to invite the attention of the Parties to any matter pertaining to the aims of the present Convention;
(f) to publish periodically and distribute to the Parties current editions of Appendices I, II and III together with any information which will facilitate identification of specimens of species included in those Appendices;
(g) to prepare annual reports to the Parties on its work and on the implementation of the present Convention and such other reports as meetings of the Parties may request;
(h) to make recommendations for the implementation of the aims and provisions of the present Convention, including the exchange of information of a scientific or technical nature;
(i) to perform any other function as may be entrusted to it by the Parties.
Article XIII International measures
1. When the Secretariat in the light of information received is satisfied that any species included in Appendix I or II is being affected adversely by trade in specimens of that species or that the provisions of the present Convention are not being effectively implemented, it shall communicate such information to the authorized Management Authority of the Party or Parties concerned.
2. When any Party receives a communication as indicated in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall, as soon as possible, inform the Secretariat of any relevant facts insofar as its laws permit and, where appropriate, propose remedial action. Where the Party considers that an inquiry is desirable, such inquiry may be carried out by one or more persons expressly authorized by the Party.
3. The information provided by the Party or resulting from any inquiry as specified in paragraph 2 of this Article shall be reviewed by the next Conference of the Parties which may make whatever recommendations it deems appropriate.
Article XIV Effect on domestic legislation and international conventions
1. The provisions of the present Convention shall in no way affect the right of Parties to adopt:
(a) stricter domestic measures regarding the conditions for trade, taking, possession or transport of specimens of species included in Appendices I, II and III, or the complete prohibition thereof; or
(b) domestic measures restricting or prohibiting trade, taking, possession or transport of species not included in Appendix I, II or III.
2. The provisions of the present Convention shall in no way affect the provisions of any domestic measures or the obligations of Parties deriving from any treaty, convention, or international agreement relating to other aspects of trade, taking, possession or transport of specimens which is in force or subsequently may enter into force for any Party including any measure pertaining to the Customs, public health, veterinary or plant quarantine fields.
3. The provisions of the present Convention shall in no way affect the provisions of, or the obligations deriving from, any treaty, convention or international agreement concluded or which may be concluded between States creating a union or regional trade agreement establishing or maintaining a common external Customs control and removing Customs control between the
  Text of the Convention – 9


parties thereto insofar as they relate to trade among the States members of that union or agreement.
4. A State party to the present Convention, which is also a party to any other treaty, convention or international agreement which is in force at the time of the coming into force of the present Convention and under the provisions of which protection is afforded to marine species included in Appendix II, shall be relieved of the obligations imposed on it under the provisions of the present Convention with respect to trade in specimens of species included in Appendix II that are taken by ships registered in that State and in accordance with the provisions of such other treaty, convention or international agreement.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles III, IV and V, any export of a specimen taken in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article shall only require a certificate from a Management Authority of the State of introduction to the effect that the specimen was taken in accordance with the provisions of the other treaty, convention or international agreement in question.
6. Nothing in the present Convention shall prejudice the codification and development of the law of the sea by the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea convened pursuant to Resolution 2750 C (XXV) of the General Assembly of the United Nations nor the present or future claims and legal views of any State concerning the law of the sea and the nature and extent of coastal and flag State jurisdiction.
Article XV Amendments to Appendices I and II
1. The following provisions shall apply in relation to amendments to Appendices I and II at meetings of the Conference of the Parties:
(a) Any Party may propose an amendment to Appendix I or II for consideration at the next meeting. The text of the proposed amendment shall be communicated to the Secretariat at least 150 days before the meeting. The Secretariat shall consult the other Parties and interested bodies on the amendment in accordance with the provisions of sub- paragraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 2 of this Article and shall communicate the response to all Parties not later than 30 days before the meeting.
(b) Amendments shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority of Parties present and voting. For these purposes “Parties present and voting” means Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Parties abstaining from voting shall not be counted among the two-thirds required for adopting an amendment.
(c) Amendments adopted at a meeting shall enter into force 90 days after that meeting for all Parties except those which make a reservation in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.
2. The following provisions shall apply in relation to amendments to Appendices I and II between meetings of the Conference of the Parties:
(a) Any Party may propose an amendment to Appendix I or II for consideration between meetings by the postal procedures set forth in this paragraph.
(b) For marine species, the Secretariat shall, upon receiving the text of the proposed amendment, immediately communicate it to the Parties. It shall also consult inter- governmental bodies having a function in relation to those species especially with a view to obtaining scientific data these bodies may be able to provide and to ensuring co-ordination with any conservation measures enforced by such bodies. The Secretariat shall communicate the views expressed and data provided by these bodies and its own findings and recommendations to the Parties as soon as possible.
(c) For species other than marine species, the Secretariat shall, upon receiving the text of the proposed amendment, immediately communicate it to the Parties, and, as soon as possible thereafter, its own recommendations.
 Text of the Convention – 10


(d) Any Party may, within 60 days of the date on which the Secretariat communicated its recommendations to the Parties under sub-paragraph (b) or (c) of this paragraph, transmit to the Secretariat any comments on the proposed amendment together with any relevant scientific data and information.
(e) The Secretariat shall communicate the replies received together with its own recommendations to the Parties as soon as possible.
(f) If no objection to the proposed amendment is received by the Secretariat within 30 days of the date the replies and recommendations were communicated under the provisions of sub- paragraph (e) of this paragraph, the amendment shall enter into force 90 days later for all Parties except those which make a reservation in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.
(g) If an objection by any Party is received by the Secretariat, the proposed amendment shall be submitted to a postal vote in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraphs (h), (i) and (j) of this paragraph.
(h) The Secretariat shall notify the Parties that notification of objection has been received.
(i) Unless the Secretariat receives the votes for, against or in abstention from at least one-half of the Parties within 60 days of the date of notification under sub-paragraph (h) of this paragraph, the proposed amendment shall be referred to the next meeting of the Conference for further consideration.
(j) Provided that votes are received from one-half of the Parties, the amendment shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority of Parties casting an affirmative or negative vote.
(k) The Secretariat shall notify all Parties of the result of the vote.
(l) If the proposed amendment is adopted it shall enter into force 90 days after the date of the notification by the Secretariat of its acceptance for all Parties except those which make a reservation in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.
3. During the period of 90 days provided for by sub-paragraph(c) of paragraph1 or sub- paragraph (l) of paragraph 2 of this Article any Party may by notification in writing to the Depositary Government make a reservation with respect to the amendment.
Until such reservation is withdrawn the Party shall be treated as a State not a Party to the present Convention with respect to trade in the species concerned.
Article XVI Appendix III and amendments thereto
1. Any Party may at any time submit to the Secretariat a list of species which it identifies as being subject to regulation within its jurisdiction for the purpose mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article II. Appendix III shall include the names of the Parties submitting the species for inclusion therein, the scientific names of the species so submitted, and any parts or derivatives of the animals or plants concerned that are specified in relation to the species for the purposes of sub- paragraph (b) of Article I.
2. Each list submitted under the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be communicated to the Parties by the Secretariat as soon as possible after receiving it. The list shall take effect as part of Appendix III 90 days after the date of such communication. At any time after the communication of such list, any Party may by notification in writing to the Depositary Government enter a reservation with respect to any species or any parts or derivatives, and until such reservation is withdrawn, the State shall be treated as a State not a Party to the present Convention with respect to trade in the species or part or derivative concerned.
 Text of the Convention – 11


3. A Party which has submitted a species for inclusion in Appendix III may withdraw it at any time by notification to the Secretariat which shall communicate the withdrawal to all Parties. The withdrawal shall take effect 30 days after the date of such communication.
4. Any Party submitting a list under the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall submit to the Secretariat a copy of all domestic laws and regulations applicable to the protection of such species, together with any interpretations which the Party may deem appropriate or the Secretariat may request. The Party shall, for as long as the species in question is included in Appendix III, submit any amendments of such laws and regulations or any interpretations as they are adopted.
Article XVII Amendment of the Convention
1. An extraordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties shall be convened by the Secretariat on the written request of at least one-third of the Parties to consider and adopt amendments to the present Convention. Such amendments shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority of Parties present and voting. For these purposes “Parties present and voting” means Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Parties abstaining from voting shall not be counted among the two-thirds required for adopting an amendment.
2. The text of any proposed amendment shall be communicated by the Secretariat to all Parties at least 90 days before the meeting.
3. An amendment shall enter into force for the Parties which have accepted it 60 days after two- thirds of the Parties have deposited an instrument of acceptance of the amendment with the Depositary Government. Thereafter, the amendment shall enter into force for any other Party 60 days after that Party deposits its instrument of acceptance of the amendment.
Article XVIII Resolution of disputes
1. Any dispute which may arise between two or more Parties with respect to the interpretation or application of the provisions of the present Convention shall be subject to negotiation between the Parties involved in the dispute.
2. If the dispute can not be resolved in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, the Parties may, by mutual consent, submit the dispute to arbitration, in particular that of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, and the Parties submitting the dispute shall be bound by the arbitral decision.
Article XIX Signature
The present Convention shall be open for signature at Washington until 30th April 1973 and thereafter at Berne until 31st December 1974.
    Text of the Convention – 12


Article XX Ratification, acceptance, approval
The present Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Government of the Swiss Confederation which shall be the Depositary Government.
Article XXI Accession
1. The present Convention shall be open indefinitely for accession. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary Government.
2. This Convention shall be open for accession by regional economic integration organizations constituted by sovereign States which have competence in respect of the negotiation, conclusion and implementation of international agreements in matters transferred to them by their Member States and covered by this Convention.
3. In their instruments of accession, such organizations shall declare the extent of their competence with respect to the matters governed by the Convention. These organizations shall also inform the Depositary Government of any substantial modification in the extent of their competence. Notifications by regional economic integration organizations concerning their competence with respect to matters governed by this Convention and modifications thereto shall be distributed to the Parties by the Depositary Government.
4. In matters within their competence, such regional economic integration organizations shall exercise the rights and fulfil the obligations which this Convention attributes to their Member States, which are Parties to the Convention. In such cases the Member States of the organizations shall not be entitled to exercise such rights individually.
5. In the fields of their competence, regional economic integration organizations shall exercise their right to vote with a number of votes equal to the number of their Member States which are Parties to the Convention. Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their Member States exercise theirs, and vice versa.
6. Any reference to “Party” in the sense used in Article I (h) of this Convention to “State”/”States” or to “State Party”/”State Parties” to the Convention shall be construed as including a reference to any regional economic integration organization having competence in respect of the negotiation, conclusion and application of international agreements in matters covered by this Convention.
Article XXII Entry into force
1. The present Convention shall enter into force 90 days after the date of deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, with the Depositary Government.
2. For each State which ratifies, accepts or approves the present Convention or accedes thereto after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the present Convention shall enter into force 90 days after the deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
   Text of the Convention – 13


Article XXIII Reservations
1. The provisions of the present Convention shall not be subject to general reservations. Specific reservations may be entered in accordance with the provisions of this Article and Articles XV and XVI.
2. Any State may, on depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, enter a specific reservation with regard to:
(a) any species included in Appendix I, II or III; or
(b) any parts or derivatives specified in relation to a species included in Appendix III.
3. Until a Party withdraws its reservation entered under the provisions of this Article, it shall be treated as a State not a Party to the present Convention with respect to trade in the particular species or parts or derivatives specified in such reservation.
Article XXIV Denunciation
Any Party may denounce the present Convention by written notification to the Depositary Government at any time. The denunciation shall take effect twelve months after the Depositary Government has received the notification.
Article XXV Depositary
1. The original of the present Convention, in the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish languages, each version being equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Depositary Government, which shall transmit certified copies thereof to all States that have signed it or deposited instruments of accession to it.
2. The Depositary Government shall inform all signatory and acceding States and the Secretariat of signatures, deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, entry into force of the present Convention, amendments thereto, entry and withdrawal of reservations and notifications of denunciation.
3. As soon as the present Convention enters into force, a certified copy thereof shall be transmitted by the Depositary Government to the Secretariat of the United Nations for registration and publication in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
In witness whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed the present Convention.
Done at Washington this third day of March, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Seventy-three.
  Text of the Convention – 14